So we welcome you commissioner
to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, we all have, uh, this report now, just, uh, members,
the primary production committee was going to be joining us,
but, uh, they aren't
because they've run over on their session.
So I understand you may do a private briefing
with them, a separate one.
So, uh, look, Simon, we will hand it over
to you for our remarks.
Actually, just before we start,
because Barbara has just walked into the room, um, uh,
just gonna seek leave of the committee for Barbara PR
to participate, um, in this briefing this afternoon.
Yes. Hearing Okay. We have Deborah come in. Yes.
And we may have, and other members join as long
as members are, are happy to, to grant me for
that participation.
Thank you. Okay. Well, we will hand it over to you
for some opening remarks,
and yes, be mindful that there'll be plenty
of questions, I'm sure.
Sure. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, I have with me Dr. Anna Hooper and, uh, Dr. Uh, Nora.
Ari. These are the two people who've done a lot
of the spade work here
and Matt Patterson, whom I think, you know, uh, I'd like
to present the key findings from my latest report,
which is entitled, reviewing the use
of the LUC System in a regulatory context,
which was published last December.
Let me start by outlining
what the LUC system is.
LUC stands for Land Use Capability.
It's a land classification system,
which was developed in the 1950s based on, uh,
an American approach.
It was designed to support long-term sustained
production on the land.
So we did this because we wanted
to know about the productive capability of, uh, the land.
Um, it, there's eight classes.
I think most of you probably know this, LUC one to eight.
Uh, within each of those classes, uh, there are subclasses.
The subclasses are, uh, identified on the basis
of the dominant limitation for production.
There's four potential limitations.
I mean, all of them might apply,
but only the, the predominant one is then subclassified.
They are erod ability, wetness, soil
and climate, um, and that then there are units within those.
But this is the key point.
It was never designed to address environmental challenges.
It was to tell us what, what our land could produce.
So the first question you might ask is, why review the use
of the NUC system for a biological economy like ours?
High quality information about the land
and the wider landscape is critical,
and it is also critical for high quality, uh,
environmental regulation.
Currently, the LUC system is being relied on
to support three pieces of national regulation.
These are the national policy statement
for highly productive land,
the national environmental standard for commercial forestry
and regulation under the Climate Change Response Act
to limit ETS driven fund forestry conversions.
In addition, the LUC system is being used in regional
regulatory plans in the context of water quality
and nutrient management.
Now, given that it wasn't designed
to address environmental management challenges,
but it's now being used to support regulations,
it's prudent, I think,
to review whether the system is sufficiently robust,
particularly if the proposed new planning system is going
to have much more national direction.
The key finding of the review is
that the LUC system is ill suited for regulatory use,
especially for use of the property scale.
And that's due to several limitations.
The first is that the LUC system is outdated.
This is because the main mapping which underlies it,
was carried out in the 1970s and 1980s.
So it's around half a century ago.
And that mapping remains unchanged.
So it doesn't reflect the situation today
because land management practices such as irrigation
or drainage have directly affected the subclass limitation
of, say, wetness, for instance.
So think about Canterbury, which has been transformed, uh,
by irrigation now at the time
of the mapping, when, and,
and they did an amazing job with what they had.
So this is, we're not
being critical of the people who did it.
They did a very good job at the time,
but they had to use, uh, manual technologies
and a high degree of expert judgment.
Um, and that unavoidably introduces a high degree
of subjectivity into the areas or the polygons on the maps
and the boundaries between them.
The second, uh, limitation is that the core scale
of the mapping makes the national
LUC data set in appropriate for use at a property scale.
So the scale, uh,
of the national LUC data set is one to 50,000.
So that means a centimeter on the map equals 500
meters on the ground.
But to make operational
or site-based decisions, you need maps at the scale of say,
one to 5,000, one to 10,000 or whatever.
A centimeter equals 50 meters or a hundred meters.
Now, as any landowner knows,
and that there must be a couple in the room, I'm one,
the limitations of land can change much more frequently than
at 500 meter intervals.
I know from my own farm
that paddocks can move from well drained to not
so well drained much, much more swiftly than, uh,
50 uh, meters.
In fact, I'm having some work done
by a student at present just
to understand some of this variability.
It's really interesting stuff.
Now, let me outline how these limitations
of the LUC system play out in existing national regulations.
I'll start with highly productive land.
Let's look at a tangible example from the Hawke's Bay
where the council explored very familiar.
No, it wasn't chosen because of you, Madame Chair.
It just, it
just happens that they've got very good
information in Hawke's Bay.
Yes. But, um, this, this is what the, the regional council,
uh, explored to identify highly productive land.
Now, if you look at this map,
so this is just south of Hastings, okay?
Mm-hmm. The pink colors on the map show areas
of LUC classes, one to three identified using the national
LUC dataset.
And if you look at the second map on the right
with the yellow, it shows the class one to three land
that shows up when you use an alternative dataset.
In this case, the digital soil map s map,
which is much more recent.
And as you may be able to see, uh, at a glimpse, uh,
the areas don't match.
There's a bigger version for you.
So the teal color areas show the overlap between the two.
So the old one, the old stuff is the pink
and the newer SAP is the yellow,
and they only overlap over 41% of the land area.
Mm-hmm. The rest doesn't, the significant disagreement
between the two data sets, similar analysis in Canterbury,
by the way, showed an even lower level of agreement
around 21%.
The point is that it would need substantial ground truthing
to reconcile and validate the two.
You'd be ill-advised to rely solely on one
or either of the methods for identification
of Hadi productive land and practical terms.
If you were concerned,
and you might be that being classed
as highly productive could limit your land use options, then
that lack of overlap could spill real problems.
Just look at the pink bits south, just south of Hastings.
Hastings is the top of the map there,
and there's teal stuff.
So they both agree, but then there's some quite big bits
of pink below that.
Mm. Now the digital soil map doesn't give these a high
status, but LUC does.
So you could find yourself in an argument
with a regulator if you were in those places.
The second illustration I've chosen of
how the LEC system plays out is the national environmental
standard on commercial forestry.
Now, the N-E-S-C-F uses the erosion susceptibility
classification, that's called ESC for short, um,
which has been derived from the LUC system.
And it's a screening tool
or threshold test to identify the erosion
susceptibility of land intended for forestry.
The threshold test is used
to determine whether a forestry activity is permitted
subject to certain conditions being met,
or whether No, no, you've gotta get a resource consent.
So it it, it's, it's what's used
to triage looking at the land's erosion susceptibility.
Now, given that erosion from forestry activities is a key
environmental issue, as we know from RAF
and elsewhere, that the,
this environmental standard is supposed to manage.
Identifying the risky land accurately is really critical.
That relies on the robustness of the erosion classification
and the national ESC data set.
So let's just look at practice at what this means.
Unfortunately, the ESC erosion susceptibility
both over and under classifies susceptibility
of land to erosion.
Now, under classifying land is a problem environmentally
because it gives the green light
to forestry when maybe more questions should be asked in
stricter controls imposed.
Let's explore again with some analysis from the Hawke's Bay.
This map shows three, uh, ESC zones,
lovely smooth edges, green with low erosion susceptibility,
orange with high susceptibility
and red with very high susceptibility.
There was a fourth yellow zone for medium susceptibility,
but there wasn't any on this map.
Okay, so there's a, there's a, there's a color missing,
but for this map, there's only three,
three susceptibilities.
Just note the uniformity and ness of these zones.
That reflects the fact that this all goes back to a one
to 50,000 data set.
Okay, now look at the green zone on the second map.
So it's not, it's the identical area.
Just look at that green zone, but go down to the second map.
This adds in recent research from what was
to recently called landcare research, me federa,
which reveals that this area contains areas
of high susceptibility to landslides
and high connectivity to waterways.
And that's the red. So you can see there's plenty
of red bits in the green zone.
So here, the ESC under classifies the land.
Now, as I've mentioned, under classifying,
it lands a real risk because of the more permissive approach
the environmental standard takes to management of that land.
Now, there are of course, gonna be instances
where ESC over classifies the land
and says, we should be more cautious than we should be.
But, but the, the fact of the matter is you can't rely on
that ESC alone.
And here, just by way of interest, this third map,
we have added some additional information.
Overlaying research from Earth Sciences New Zealand,
the old GNS, this shows areas in purple
with a greater than 80% probability
of rainfall induced landslides.
Again, it shows just
how coarse the ESC zones are in comparison
with the recent research output.
But I was keen to include this slide
because I think it shows something of the power of newer,
finer resolution data sets.
The problem is
that we do not have them over all of New Zealand.
There's lots and lots and lots of gaps.
And even when we've got them,
they haven't been gathered necessarily in a way that's easy
to stitch them together for the purpose
that you're, you're concerned about.
So that brings me to my recommendations.
Uh, the first is that as a result
of the limitations I've outlined,
the current LUC system should not be used
as a basis for any future environmental regulation.
This recommendation applies both to national
and regional regulation through RMA plans.
The use of the national LUC data set
for property scale regulation used regularly in RMA plans is
particularly problematic.
Secondly, the government should invest in progressively
and proving essential contemporary data sets
that underpin land use regulation
and ensure they are publicly available and affordable
and can be easily integrated.
It's one thing to have them,
but then if you wanna put them together, you need to be sure
that they gathered in a way which enables that to happen.
As part of the review, uh,
we've identified several such data sets.
Lidars one, very accurate information on
elevation as well as slope.
And that's used for a gazillion applications hazard
management, forestry engineering, flood management
S map, which I've mentioned.
Digital soil map provides associated information
about soil properties.
There's something called the land cover database,
which tells us what's happening with land cover, you know,
forest versus grassland versus wetland versus urban versus
bare soil versus water bodies.
Uh, that one, um,
I think it's undertaken every set or eight years.
And then we need,
obviously comprehensive real time land use mapping
to support spatial planning decisions at
the national and local level.
Such maps don't currently exist.
I mean, there's lots and lots of land use maps,
but we do not have a common methodology.
Mm-hmm. There are satellites flying over
New Zealand all the time.
We do not have that information.
I just thought you'd like to see what LIDAR tells
you about Parliament.
Thi I think we are in a
building, a building.
Thirdly, these essential contemporary data sets,
and I've only mentioned a handful.
There's, there's many, many more than that. A handful.
They need to be used to modernize that LUC and ESC systems.
You don't throw the baby up with the bath water, but,
but they need to be modernized.
But I think more importantly, we are suitable.
We need to create bespoke fit for purpose models
for specific regulatory purposes.
And I think you can imagine a world in which national
direction could specify the data requirements
and layers needed to address particular problems.
But you have to have the layers
and you have to have the data, and it has to be in a form.
You can use it to do that.
Finally, we need to focus improvements on areas
where better information is most urgently needed.
I know the stuff is costly
and there are limited resources, so you need
to be able to prioritize.
And that is what a government should do, for example,
in the context of the, uh,
highly productive land regulation.
You need to focus getting the data right in those areas,
which are under pressure from urban expansion.
Mm-hmm. So that's Auckland, Tara Hamilton,
Napier Hastings, Christchurch.
I mean, it's obvious, isn't it?
Finally, some concluding remarks.
Uh, this review has highlighted
that the LUC system isn't fit for purpose
for certainly from environmental regulation.
Uh, and the sorts of uses it's been put to most recently
for the farm forestry conversion, uh, thing.
And that's really what got me, uh, going.
The limitations of that system are yet another example
of the broader issue, which I keep drawing
to this committee's attention.
And that is the state of our environmental information.
The need for better information, which is the foundation
for good decision making, uh, has been a consistent theme
that I have raised with you now
and some of your predecessors for eight years.
The new resource management system proposes
to make greater use of spatial planning
and environmental limits.
These will require much, much better information
than we have currently available.
If you're gonna have limits which can stand up in court,
which you can justify to your taxpayers rate, payers
and citizens, they need
to be based on good quality information that is not there.
In many cases. I can't stress to you enough
how critical good environmental data
and information is for environmental management.
I would go further and suggest
that without significant investment in the underlying
environmental data and information I proposed,
planning and environmental management system will fail.
With that, we'd be very happy to answer questions,
particularly my colleagues on any of the detail around, uh,
the science behind this. Hmm.
Look, thank you very much, Simon.
That really insightful, really interesting.
And look, I might just take the opportunity
to ask the first question, given
that you have given Hawks Bay as an example,
and given that, uh, you know, it is, it is an issue, uh,
you know, the luck one, two, and three, um,
and all on highly productive land Hastings, uh,
Tonga Plains, um, and you know, in terms of development,
and you just said, uh, you know, it is expensive to look at,
uh, you know, changing the modeling,
but it seemed the maps that you gave, it was the soil
that was the, um, the differentiating point.
Yes. The soil mapping. Yeah.
And so obviously that would be a priority area
that you would recommend,
but then also geographically you said as well.
So you've identified the areas that you think as, as a,
you know, government, if you were
to take on the recommendations
that you would pri prioritize areas like Hawkes Bay,
like Oakland, like Tonga, well,
Maybe not Hawkes Bay, because maybe we,
that we may actually have better information there.
I'm, I'm aware for instance, that there are, you know,
some parts of New Zealand like Canterbury, like
Horizons Man two, where there are significant gaps.
And I can tell you more about the detail of that.
Uh, yeah. Uh, and obviously focusing on the soil,
definitely that's kind of the main focus in the context
of highly productive land.
Mm. Um, but both Hog Bay
and Vito actually have almost a hundred percent
coverage of the sap.
So they do have that more refine.
So information, but, uh, it's, uh, from memory,
Canterbury has, uh, gaps
and gaps around 50% of the region.
Still missing that, but obviously the coverage is much
better on the plains, essentially the areas where
that highly productive land is more likely to be.
So if you look only at that, you know, the possible areas
for highly productive land, the coverage is almost 80%
or just for those specific ones.
But obviously there are plenty of gaps specifically for the,
on the hills on the Hillier country.
So it's not, uh, providing maybe as much help
for managing erosion issues. Mm-hmm.
And just a quick supplementary internationally, in terms
of other countries and how they classify their land
and, you know, marry it all up, uh, you know, are we, are we
behind in terms of, uh, a global international sense?
Well, we didn't specifically look into this as part
of the LEC review,
but we're, uh, well aware,
especially if you look at Australia,
there are quite a few data sets
and the, uh, obviously, you know, huge country,
but equally more resources
and more sort of efforts,
especially from the research community.
Hmm. Uh, I, uh, so it's maybe the question of ensuring
that there are those, you know, uh, correct
or robust environmental information being available
to support policy decisions,
but also to support, uh, management
of environmental issues of concern.
Just on that, can, can I tell a committee,
I'll have a report with you around the middle of the year,
which this is just a little bit of it,
which we'll pull together a lot of
what I've been saying about environmental information.
I've already, um, sent ministers in advance of coming
to Parliament, actually, but it's, it's on my website
and I've notified all of you about it.
But we produced a piece about integrated,
uh, environmental data.
Um, I'm going to pull that together with an assessment of,
um, the, the way in which some of the new technologies, uh,
which are out there can change the game
in terms of pulling us together.
Mm-hmm. Now, is New Zealand ahead or behind?
I mean, look, we've got very good scientists in pockets
doing really good bits of stuff.
We've got a slew of national data sets.
Some of them properly funded, some of them literally it's a,
you know, a, a penny here,
a penny there as they could put it together.
But, but we've, we've got bits of it.
What is needed is a conscious effort to sit down
and prioritize this
and invest in it in a, you can't do it all in a year anyhow,
but have a strategy where over a decade we seek
to transform things.
And we would certainly look at Australia in that context,
but other countries, uh, as well.
Uh, and this is the moment to do it. Mm.
Because if you're gonna have a resource management system
based on permission subject to things that you monitor,
you have to have the information to do that.
Um, so this is, this is the moment for this committee
to focus on this.
Brilliant. Thank you. Uh, Ryan Hamilton has a question.
Um, thanks, chair. Um,
and you probably segued into where I was going.
Um, Simon last year,
when we did the climate adoption framework, this got exposed
as being quite rudimentary,
and yet it still sort of formed that foundation of it.
And when I questioned, I guess, different entities within
our lovely government bureaucracy, um, no one really knew
where it should be housed.
And I wonder, and I mean, I'm assuming you are relatively
agnostic, but who do you think should house this in terms
of an entity, a ministry?
Because it crosses over
So many, well, yeah.
Um, housing sort of has a physical sense to it.
I, someone's gotta lead.
And, and my suggestion to minister was
that they should actually sit down and identify who leads.
Now, you know, we said, well, you could look at statistics,
you could look at Lenss, you could look at environment.
Now the government's abolishing
them, ministry for the environment.
Um, I don't, I don't have the answer there.
I'm rather attracted by the idea of Lins, actually.
But look, it is a question.
It's not a question of saying,
here is the commander in chief and they're gonna do it all.
It is a question of having the leadership
to look across our system to ask how it can talk to buts,
can talk to one another where the investment is needed
that needs a government wide strategy.
So in a sense, uh, that's the really the first decision.
I think a ministerial level discussion should move
to seek advice on where that should be.
And there is no right answer to that,
but we've gotta get on with it.
Um, and as you say, adaptation,
this is a, this is a classic.
There are so many data sets which you need to be able
to put together, whether it's because of land slip
and so on, and I've shown you some bits there,
or whether it's coastal, uh, sea level change or whatever.
Uh, we need fit for purpose data to make good decisions
for insurers, to make good decisions for, you know, uh,
the government to make good decisions. Mm-hmm.
And, uh, David has a question. Thank you.
I think, uh, the first thing that comes to mind is, um,
what are the perverse outcomes that are occurring
as a result of the course nature
or the, the, the lack of appropriateness of the data sets
that are equal, the information that's before us.
'cause uh, regions, uh, often, uh, have occasions
where they need to do some work
and they have to make a decision on
what tools they used to do that well.
Right? Sure.
And a lot of that sometimes comes back
to the crude cost benefit.
Yeah. Analysis of can we afford to it
to be at this course nature to be able
to serve the purposes of what we are.
Yeah. We've also got councils around New Zealand, uh,
that within the rules at a high level
that when anything does get done on a day-to-day basis,
it comes down to a farm lot level.
Mm-hmm. Where you get that closer analysis
to get the true context Yeah.
At the far more granular Yeah. Stage type thing.
So I think, uh, you know, to the,
everybody empathizes, yeah.
We would all love the, the best data we could get.
And we would like this to be done every week so
that we've got current data.
'cause even lidar, you do it today,
next year is outta date type thing.
So it's, we want this,
but it, it comes down to a cost situation.
Absolutely. And therefore, if it's a cost situation,
what is it that's incentivizing decision makers
to actually say it's worth the investment for
what we're actually trying to achieve here? Yeah,
Well see this raises,
I mean, I've thought about this a lot.
I'm a lender. I know
how my land's classified under all these things.
I can tell you they don't match up. Mm-hmm.
They simply don't match up. And so from a regulatory point
of view, I could get told to do something
because the council says, well, cost benefit
of us doing good is fine.
Great. Isn't it worth it? You just have to live with,
you know, that, you see,
the thing about the Resource Management Act is that
it wasn't, it, it, it said, well,
we don't have the information.
Let's gather it. So we've lived in a world which was costly
and in some cases slow
because you had to get the information.
Sure. You know, not far the ordinary farming operation,
that's already a permitted use,
but all sorts of things, you know, somebody's coming in
to do something which isn't happening.
Okay. Oh, you're gonna get a report on this, report on this.
So you gather all of this information, much of it held
by government entities, which taxpayers have funded
to provide this, but they may well be charging for it now.
But you, you pull all of this together,
so the cost is at the front end,
and then you get the resource consent and you go and do it.
When you move to a system which says, look, um,
we're not gonna ask questions at the front end.
We've pre decided this is okay provided,
and we'll monitor it, then you haven't got the luxury
of saying, well, is it worth getting the information or not?
You don't know. You're gonna have
to invest in the information to make the system flow easily.
So I think there's very significant efficiency gains under
the proposed legislation
provided it's based on good quality information.
So, you know, it's a, you take a choice,
you either spend upfront, uh, or you spend after.
Um, and,
and think that's, that's really where it,
that's the debate the committee needs
to think about in the context of these bills
You'd only spend afterwards if you are having litigation
or all sorts of problems with.
But then also it's the supplementary to that.
I mean, there's a cost potentially to the value of the land
because yes, you get reclassified
and you suddenly go from a class one
to a class four or five.
Well, obviously that land is potentially not as valuable
as it quite was under the older system.
But then it could be the flip of that, I suppose.
I, I would, who, who's buying land on that.
I'd encourage, I'd encourage your land.
Have a look at the LUC maps, have a look at the S map,
have a look at anything else you can find.
'cause there are some, some amazing stuff actually,
which is very granular.
There's, there's some stuff, which is just plain role.
Mm-hmm. Um, Joe has a question.
Oh, thank you. Um, I've really enjoyed reading, uh,
through this report of yours.
I just have a question with regard to, um, the, uh, side
where you talk about, where you talk about underestimating
site specific areas that it, you know, could be more prone
to erosion than what has been, um, noted, given the erosion
that we've seen, uh, with the weather events, you know,
like cyclone Gabrielle
and, um, uh, all of that type of, um, slipping, et cetera.
Yep. I mean, do you think that these data sets have aided
or hindered good legislation making?
And the reason I ask
that is if we think about the climate change response
amendment bill that's, that was, uh, passed, that provides,
um, and exemptions for forestry expansion on a UC seven
and eight land, if it remains unchanged, I mean,
are we likely to see worse erosion come outcomes for, or
I dunno, I haven't investigated that,
but, you know, I mean, my point, I think I made the point
to is that if you don't have good quality information,
and you, and to take David's point, you know,
well cost benefit, is it worth really finding this out?
No. On balance, we won't.
We'll just, you know, we'll go with the course data.
Well, you may, this is what you pay later when suddenly, uh,
you've unclassified, you haven't got the right, uh, consent,
you know, requirements or permitted use requirements.
All the stuff comes down the river
and you're paying after the event.
So, you know, if you pay for the information in advance,
then you, you can hopefully avoid that in the future.
Which is why I'd say that investing in these data sets
is really a major economically significant investment.
And look, it's not just for environmental purposes,
you know, for economic purposes.
It is really useful for landowners to have access to this.
Now you could say, oh no,
if it's private, they should pay for it.
So then we got every landowner in New Zealand going off
and contracted to find this stuff.
I'm actually think a believer in governments having a role
to provide public good information.
I think it's good for the economy.
I think it's good for the environment,
Jo. Yeah,
thank you. And, and stuff on that.
So, um, given, given what we are seeing in, in,
in these weather events and, and another example,
and you talked about perhaps focusing on the hotspots,
and I would assume that that would be,
um, one of those areas.
How much urgency do you think that, uh,
future this government
or future government should really put
on on something like this? So I've
Said you should prioritize the hotspot.
In fact, I think you'll find the colleagues can correct me
here, but as a result of events up the coast, yeah.
Uh, we've got much better data there than we have
in other places in New Zealand.
But it's been a case of after the event, have you
Got thinking around a time, time limit for, you know,
like within five years, two years,
15 months? Well, as I've said,
it all comes down to resources.
And governments don't have unlimited resources. No.
But I'd have thought that a realistic sort
of timeframe might be to say a decade from now, right?
We want to have completely changed the data landscape
for New Zealand and make it a big national priority.
I don't think it's party political.
Everyone can sign up to this. It would help everybody.
But it requires, you know, this is the thing.
It requires more than just, alright, well look,
we've found some money for this this year.
It's a question of having a strategy. I think we gonna,
Yeah, I was going just to add specifically on Tara,
you might be aware that obviously the council there since
the cyclone, uh, has produced a map really on the back
of the research by BSI, uh, which, uh,
Simon has also showed showing essentially the areas of high
on slight susceptibility Yeah.
High connectivity to waterways. Mm-hmm.
So really thinking about not just waterland is more likely
to road, but where are these areas that are then going
to factor waterways, IE all the sediment, all the debris,
everything going down the slope into the waterways.
But that map has been produced
after as a result, you know, of the event.
But in a supplementary to that though, I mean this is,
we're talking about cost and the benefit, I suppose it's,
um, climate mitigation as well, right?
Mm-hmm. Because, you know, if you look in Hawkes Bay
and during Cyclone Gabrielle, like a lot of
that slash came down from the hills
and what, like, there was a lot
of questioning at the time in terms of the land use
and, you know, the classification of the land
and whether I suppose it should have been planted.
Um, and this, um, if there was a better mapping
and better data potentially, you know,
that may not happen in future
Could, I mean, I just, if I may,
I think you should take an interest
as a committee in the science changes to the science system
because the way we fund, uh, research is changing.
And I'm taking a very close interest in this
and I'll, I'll bring a report
to you at some stage on what it means.
But I, I think it, I, I certainly don't think the system
as we have it is necessarily very transparent.
Um, it's often hard to work out why stuff is happening
and why it isn't happening.
But we're moving to, I think a more transparent system
and the government's putting a lot
of eggs on the economic basket.
Um, it will be interesting to see what priority they give
to environmental research.
But key to this are some
of these data sets which are used in research and,
and they are research based.
It is critically important, again, in the science reforms
that the system can actually pick up these
priorities and fund them.
So this is, this is linked not not just
to the resource management reforms,
but it's also linked to the science reforms. Mm.
Mm mm La
Um, thank you so much for this.
And this question would probably take like
a whole research program.
Oh, don't encourage him.
I, I just wondered if you had any thoughts
because is it right that East Met is like 2020,
like much more up to
Date? I'll just speak. It's
Regularly updated. Yeah.
Okay. And they keep on expanding it.
And the latest update was 2025.
Okay. Yeah. But the LUC was
between the seventies and nineties.
No, 15. It was earlier than that. Seventies,
Eighties. The initial mapping was
1970s and eighties.
And then there was some additional mapping
in the early nineties.
Right. Yeah. But no,
Do you think even in, because the overlap data was so
interesting, like, do you think there's even potentially
something in that about the changing,
potentially the changing forms of our land use?
Say, you know, obviously post, um, you know,
deforestation and everything like that.
Like could even the differences between them
be that the land itself ah,
I see is actually quite different.
Look, Uh,
I've wondered about this actually.
I mean, I tend to think if you are thinking this is a really
interesting thought, what's the echo
of original land clearance?
Going back to, to,
but what Polynesian arrival,
that upsets a whole raft of things happening.
Then 8, 7, 800 years later, you have another massive thing.
Those processes don't happen in a year or two years. Mm-hmm.
They can take decades if not centuries.
So there's probably echoes of the past running
around all of this.
But to be frank, I don't think the sort of research tools
and databases we're running now are picking those up.
Yeah. That, that would be my instinct.
Yeah. No, I don't think so. It's an interesting, very
Interesting. Yes. But
what's
Important is what is today?
What's real time? 'cause what we're talking about Yes.
Utilizing regulation. Oh, absolutely. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It was, but it's an interesting question.
I mean that's the sort of fundamental research question
though, that I think a public research system
should be able to fund.
Because you never know
what insights you get out of that sort of work.
I mean, I, it's, it's, it's not a silly question.
You can't put a vast amount of money into that.
'cause this is pretty expensive. But at the corner
of your investment portfolio,
And particularly about if you are investing at scale,
you also want to understand how that might change
and maybe that information, the overlays you're doing
actually help inform that as well.
Um, one example that I will give, for example,
actually again on the back of the cyclone in, uh, Gibo,
and we've got this example here.
They have flown the lidar again.
So essentially they got two, uh, time points
where they've obtained the elevation data.
Mm-hmm. Um, and it shows essentially
before the cyclone and after.
And it shows quite big differences,
especially when they use the specific technique
that really shows the areas where either a lot
of city mutation has happened and essentially landslides
or earth flows have occurred,
or obviously the areas of a acquisition
where settlement just got deposited.
Mm-hmm. And that is the thing that you get really from, um,
doing like at least two times,
like having at least two times
series, not the one off. Yeah.
No. Um, we've got time for one last question
before we have to wrap it up.
Sure. And, uh, we'll take that from Rachel Booken. Yeah.
Thank, thank you. Um,
I hear your continued message back in Oh, that's good.
In consist Yes. Uh, on, on this point.
And the, the data is, it's just not good enough. Is it?
Um, is it fear
or is there a way of looking at what's in this report
as there's soil and soil quality?
So productivity of soil is one thing
and then there's erosion
and we talked about sediment running off
and also we've got slips and all those sorts of hazards.
That, that's my first question.
And then the next one is if you can, um, give us some idea
of the cost that might be involved, particularly
for these hotspots, whether that's erosion
or it's, um, soil productivity.
If you were a shake of the head,
The answer is no.
'cause we haven't gone in and done that.
But look, just, I mean, to give you a sense, yeah,
there are, when it comes to, um,
understanding what's happening in the landscape from a sort
of a climate and adaptation point of view, there is, uh,
probably 10 or 15 data sets running there.
Um, this is the National Climate database
that cost about $10 million a year to maintain
as the National River Flows database.
Same roughly 10 million bucks. National landslide database.
Uh, about 10 million a year to, to run that.
Uh, these, these are numbers that I've mfe shared
that they're just looking at this right now.
But there is a ton of stuff here.
You know, there is, there's probably tens
of millions being spent right now
in maintaining these at various levels of updatedness,
you know, now, and
that's only, I'm just ones I'm talking about.
There are only about this sort of adaptation, you know?
Yeah. Rain climate, soil landslide stuff.
If you want to then get into biodiversity, if you want
to get into land for productive purposes, then
that's other data sets that you need.
So what's needed is, I think a complete piece
of housekeeping, an inventory.
And you see if I just add this little fact, Adam chair,
when I was the minister in 1992,
we actually put together a list of significant databases
and collections, which whatever the contestability
of the funding system had to be funded.
That list has not changed in over three decades now.
That is just crazy. Yeah.
Because we are living in a different world.
There are whole new data sets which have come into
existence, but they're not nationally significant.
So this has really gotta be picked up
and looked at seriously.
Yeah. No, look, thank you very much for your time today.
We have met time.
Is it a useful thing to think about,
so the soil productivity differently
for from the erosion or, or
Well no, you need to put the two together
because we use land.
So you want to know, okay, how productive,
but then how susceptible that may change
what you can do on the land.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah.
No, um, really interesting, really,
really interesting report
and a lot for us to, to think about.
So, uh, thank you for your time today. Really appreciate it.
Thank you.